\pagebreak
# Introduction

The Domain Name System, or DNS, can be realted to a phonebook of the internet. It allows users to use domain names instead of IP addreses to connect to websites. Meaning, instead of entering a string of numbers such as "142.250.138.139", a user can simply input "google.com" into their search bar. This request for "google.com" will be sent to a DNS Server, which is simply a server that hosts a DNS service. This sever will search through a table in attempts to find what IP address is associated with the given domain name. If the server does not know, it can send the request upstream to a different DNS server who may know the answer. This process is known as resolving, as it eventually hopes to resolve the request made. Resolving is repeated until a sever finds the IP address for the domain. After this, the server will respond with the desired IP. This response will cascade down the stream of servers until it reaches the user's DNS which tells the user where to find "google.com". DNS does all the heavy lifting, and the user is forwarded to the correct webpage. 

DNS was created and adopted in 1983 and has not changed much since then. The largest issues currently impacting the DNS process are privacy, integrity, and security. Standard DNS requests are not encrypted, which would allow anyone in the network as well as whoever operates your DNS resolver to view requests made. This leaves DNS open to attacks such as cache poisoning, DNS tunneling, and DNS hijacking. To remedy this issue, security protocols such as DNSSEC and DNS Over HTTPS have been developed to help combat the DNS security concerns. However, these security features are not always enabled or available to the average user.

DNS is an important and interesting topic in cyberspace. It increases in interest when you consider setting up a custom local DNS server. A user can set up a local server to block requests to unwanted domains, increase security, cache requests, and even cache large downloads. By default, devices will use the DNS Servers provided by their internet's ISP, but a user can easily change this to use DNS Servers that are more secure, avoid censorship, or even bypass geo-restrictions. However, these additions come with a price. Typically, if a user wanted to combine these benefits, they would have to chain multple DNS servers together. This could be done by setting each server one as another server's resolver. This can be done until the request is sent to an external DNS server. While it may sound easy, implementation of this can be a vexing undertaking.

The MoDNs Framework aims to provide functionality to easily implement any process that a network administrator wishes to add. MoDNS opens up the process of DNS by allowing the installation of plugins that directly change how DNS queries are handled.

