
# Writing Plugins for MoDNS

The plugin system is what makes MoDNS, MoDNS. The MoDNS server is really
just a framework for running plugins. Any and all DNS functionality is
provided by plugins.

A _plugin_ implements one to five __modules__. These modules each
control a certain step in the DNS resolution process.

Modules which a plugin can implement are:

- __Listeners__, which control how and when DNS requests are recieved
- __Interceptors__, which can _intercept_ a request and provide a
response before it is resolved.
- __Resolvers__, which control how normal requests are resolved
- __Validators__, which can validate a response provided by the resolver
- __Inspectors__, which can view all requests and subsequent responses

MoDNS plugins are shared library files which export certain functions
using the __C ABI__. This has the benefit of meaning that most modern
compiled programming languages can be used to write MoDNS plugins,
albeit with some coercsion.

The `modns-sdk` Rust crate is used to provide functions and headers for
interfacing with the MoDNS server. A archive file is available on the
GitHub releases page for MoDNS with the required header and library
files to link to `modns-sdk`. (TODO: release a zip file of the SDK)

## Implementing Modules

The MoDNS server automatically considers a plugin as implementing a certain
module if the plugin's library exports the required functions for that
module. This section describes those functions and their requirements.

### Listener

A listener has two duties: to notify the server when a request has been
recieved, and to respond to that request with the response generated by other
modules.

A note about async:

Since the MoDNS server runs asynchronously, and listeners by their nature cannot be run
synchronously without blocking, the preferred method for writing listeners is
asynchronous. This method is not yet implemented, so documentation is provided
here for the less powerful synchronous method and the more powerful asynchronous
method. Note that the synchronous method will likely be deprecated by the
asynchronous method once it is fully implemented.

#### Synchronous Method (Deprecated)

Synchronous listeners are linked to a socket which is handled by the server. They
recieve the complete bytestream from the socket and are responsible for deserializing
it into a DNS message.

Plugins implementing a synchronous listener must export the following C functions:

```C
// Decoder function
uint8_t impl_listener_sync_decode_req(struct ByteVector req,
                                      struct DnsMessage *message,
                                      const void *plugin_state);

// Encoder function
uint8_t impl_listener_sync_encode_resp(const struct DnsMessage *resp,
                                       struct ByteVector *buf,
                                       const void *plugin_state);
```

The decoder function takes the byte stream encoded in `req` and deserializes it into
the contents of `message`.

The encoder function takes the DNS message struct contained in `*resp` and encodes
it into the byte stream at `buf`.

See [below](#interacting-with-provided-types) for information about the provided
structs

Both functions also recieve a `plugin_state` argument, discussed
[below](#non-persistent-shared-state)

##### Return Value

Both functions return 0 on success and any other number on error. Error handling is not
yet fully fleshed out, but generally an error code should only be returned in the case
of an unrecoverable error that will likely propagate to further calls of the plugin.

##### Reasons For Deprecation

The synchronous method is planned for deprecation once the asynchronous method is
implemented. This is for several reasons, namely:

- Synchronous listeners are limited in ability, since the actual method for recieving
requests must be handled by the server. For example, a plugin couldn't implement a
DNS over HTTPS listener unless the server provided a significant amount of the infrastructure
to do so.
- Synchronous listeners must be paired with a single socket connection managed by the
server. Configuring this socket pairing adds complexity to the user experience which
goes against the goals of this project

#### Asynchronous Method (Not Yet Implemented)

NOTE: Asynchronous listeners are not yet supported, and the following documentation
is subject to change as implementation details get fleshed out

Asynchronous listeners are periodically polled for a DNS message. If they are not ready
to provide one (i.e., one has not been recieved), the server will move on to poll other
listeners.

Plugins implementing an asynchronous listener must export the following C functions:

```C
// Poll function
uint8_t impl_listener_async_poll(struct DnsMessage *message,
                                 void *request_state,
                                 const void *plugin_state);

// Responder function
uint8_t impl_listener_async_respond(const struct DnsMessage *resp,
                                    void *request_state,
                                    const void *plugin_state);
```

The poll function is called when the server polls the plugin for a request.
If a request is not yet avaliable, this function returns 1; Once a message is available,
the function should encode that message into `*message` and return 0.

The responder function is used to respond to the request with the response message generated
by the other modules.

A `request_state` pointer is also provided for the plugin to store ephemeral state specific
to that request, such as the originating address. Similar to `plugin_state`, the contents of
this pointer are unknown to the server, and should be used to provide any persistent state
data to the responder function for responding to the request (ex. the socket address that
the request originated from).

### Interceptor

Io implement an Interceptor, your plugin must export the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_intercept_req(const struct DnsMessage *req,
                           struct DnsMessage *resp,
                           const void *plugin_state)
```

To ignore the request, return 0. To respond to the request, encode a response into `*resp` and
return 1. Any other return code indicates an unrecoverable error.

### Resolver

To implement a Resolver, your plugin must export the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_resolve_req(const struct DnsMessage *req,
                         struct DnsMessage *resp,
                         const void *plugin_state)
```

This function is called to generate a response to the request whenever no interceptor responds.
On success, this function should encode the response into `*resp` and return 0. Return any other
number to indicate an unrecoverable error.

### Validator

To implement a Validator, your plugin must export the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_validate_resp(const struct DnsMessage *req,
                           const struct DnsMessage *resp,
                           struct DnsMessage *err_resp,
                           const void *plugin_state)
```

This function is called to validate a response from the Resolver and possibly replace the response
with one indicating an error. On a valid response, this function should return 0. On an invalid
response, this function should encode a new response into `*err_resp` and return 1. Return any other
number to indicate an unrecoverable error.

### Inspector

To implement an Inspector, your plugin must export the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_inspect_resp(const struct DnsMessage *req,
                          const struct DnsMessage *resp,
                          uint8_t source,
                          const void *plugin_state)
```

This function is called once a response has been returned from the other plugins. It does not affect
the response.

The `source` argument indicates the step of the resolution process which originated the provided
response. A `0` indicates a response from an Interceptor, `1` indicates a Resolver, and `2`
indicates the response was an error response from a Validator.

This function should return 0 on success and any other number to indicate an unrecoverable error.

## Interacting with provided types

The MoDNS server and SDK are written in Rust, and so all non-native data types used for programming
plugins are FFI-safe versions of types written in Rust. Types which involve lists of objects use
wrapper types for Rust `Vec<T>` types, and the SDK provides helper functions for resizing these
arrays using the Rust allocator.

To maintain memory safety, all data which originates from the MoDNS server (i.e., any data passed as
an argument to one of the implementation functions) should be allocated by Rust rather than by the
plugin's native allocator. This is discussed in more detail [below](#working-with-vectorized-data). 

### Handling DNS Messages

The `DnsMessage` struct encodes all fields of a DNS message as defined by
[RFC 1035](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1035). Its Rust definition looks like this:

```Rust
pub struct DnsMessage {
    pub id: u16,
    pub is_response: bool,
    pub opcode: DnsOpcode,
    pub authoritative_answer: bool,
    pub truncation: bool,
    pub recursion_desired: bool,
    pub recursion_available: bool,
    pub response_code: DnsResponseCode,
    pub questions: Vec<DnsQuestion>,
    pub answers: Vec<DnsResourceRecord>,
    pub authorities: Vec<DnsResourceRecord>,
    pub additional: Vec<DnsResourceRecord>
}
```

#### Opcodes and Rcodes

Currently, Opcodes and Rcodes are encoded as enums, with the following
Rust declaration:

```rust

#[derive(Debug)]
pub enum DnsOpcode {
    Query,
    InverseQuery,
    Status,
    Notify,
    Update,
    DSO
}

#[derive(Debug)]
pub enum DnsResponseCode {
    NoError,
    FormatError,
    ServerFailure,
    NameError,
    NotImplemented,
    Refused
}

```

This was written to match [RFC 1035](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1035),
however it does not account for later changes to the DNS specification,
specifically [EDNS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6891). For this
reason, later versions of the SDK will replace these fields with `u16` numbers.

#### Questions and Resource Records

The "meat" of DNS messages are Questions and Resource Records. These types are defined
in Rust as follows:

```Rust

pub struct DnsQuestion {
    pub name: Vec<String>,
    pub type_code: u16,
    pub class_code: u16
}

pub struct DnsResourceRecord {
    pub name: Vec<String>,
    pub type_code: u16,
    pub class_code: u16,
    pub ttl: i32,
    pub rdlength: u16,
    pub rdata: DnsResourceData
}

pub enum DnsResourceData {
    A { address: Ipv4Addr },
    AAAA { address: Ipv6Addr },
    Ns { nsdname: Vec<String> },
    Cname { cname: Vec<String> },
    Ptr { ptrdname: Vec<String> },
    Soa {
        mname: Vec<String>,
        rname: Vec<String>,
        serial: u32,
        refresh: u32,
        retry: u32,
        expire: u32,
        minimum: u32
    },
    Txt { txt_data: Vec<String> },
    Other { rdata: Vec<u8> }
}

```

The `DnsResourceData` enum is also provided and includes types for some of the most
common RR types. RR types not accounted for should be encoded as the `Other` variant
with `rdata` as a byte vector which matches the standard over-the-wire encoding of
that type.

It is good practice, though not a guarantee, that plugins which create `DnsMessage`s
should encode types which have enum variants as the corresponding enum variant. Plugins
which consume `DnsMessage`s should expect either form of these types (i.e. the matching
enum variant or as `Other`).

### Working With Vectorized Data

Data which involves Vectorized data is encoded as an FFI-safe version of Rust's `Vec<T>`
type. The SDK provides the following types:

- `QuestionVector` = `Vec<DnsQuestion>`
- `RRVector` = `Vec<DnsResourceRecord>`
- `ByteVector` = `Vec<u8>` or `String`
- `BytePtrVector` = `Vec<Vec<u8>>` or `Vec<String>`

For each of these types, A `resize` function is provided which should be used to add
or remove elements from these vectors. For example, to resize `QuestionVector my_vec`
to include 4 `DnsQuesion`s:

```C
uint8_t rc = resize_question_vec(&my_vec, 4);
```

A non-zero return code indicates an error.

### Working with Strings

Strings in DNS messages are represented as `ByteVector`s, which are an FFI-safe version
of Rust's `String` type. They are not directly compatible with functions which expect
C-style strings.

Helper functions are provided to duplicate `ByteVector` data into C-style strings, and
vice-versa. Alternatively, you can mutate the strings directly or convert them into your
language's built-in string types. Either method is discussed below.

#### Using Helper Functions

Two helper functions are provided to interface between `ByteVector`s and C-style strings.

To copy a `ByteVector` string into a C-style string, use `modns_strdup_from_bytevec`. The
destination string must be allocated to at least the length of the `ByteVec` plus one.

For example, in C:

```C
// struct ByteVector source_string = "foo"
char * my_c_string = malloc(sizeof(uint8_t) * 256);

uintptr_t my_c_string_len = modns_strdup_from_bytevec(&source_string, my_c_string, 256);
// my_c_string_leng== 4
```

To copy a C-style string back to a `ByteVec`, use `modns_strdup_to_bytevec`. The destination
`ByteVec` will be reallocated if needed to fit the string. You must free the string's memory
yourself (if using C or another language with manual memory management)

For example, in C:

```C
// struct ByteVector dest_string;
char * my_c_string = "bar";

uintptr_t new_bytevec_len = modns_strdup_to_bytevec(source_string, &dest_string);
// new_bytevec_len = 3;
```

#### Interacting with ByteVectors Directly

As stated above, `ByteVector`s are thin wrappers around Rust's `String` type (which, in turn, is
simply a vector of bytes). The struct itself looks like this:

```Rust
struct ByteVector {
    ptr: *mut u8,
    size: usize,
    capacity: usize
}
```

Or, in C:

```C
typedef struct ByteVector {
    uint8_t *ptr,
    uintptr_t size,
    uintptr_t capacity
} ByteVector;
```

`ptr` points to the buffer, `size` refers to the length of the string, and `capacity` refers to the
allocated size of the buffer.

The following actions are safe to do without calling any SDK helper functions:

- Read data from `ptr`, without the length of read data exceeding `size` bytes,
- Write data to `ptr`, without the length of written data exceeding `capacity` bytes,
- Decrease `size`, and
- Increase `size`, so long as `size` doesn't exceed `capacity` and the data in `ptr` is a valid UTF-8
string up to length `size`.

Essentially, changing `ptr` or `capacity`, or expanding the buffer past `capacity`, require using the
Rust allocator. The `resize_byte_vec` helper function is provided for this purpose. See documentation
for `resize` functions [above](#working-with-vectorized-data)

## Shared & Persistent State

Most plugins will require storing some form of state between function calls. Three methods are provided
for doing so:

- Use a database
- Store files in an assigned directory
- Share state between function calls with the `plugin_state` pointer

### Using a Database

MoDNS provides an end-user-configurable database connection for persisting structured data between restarts
of the server. The default database backend is SQLite, but an end user may configure the server to use a
Postgres database backend.

Rather than managing connections and implementing a direct API interface to the database, which would likely
not interact well with existing tools for the plugin's language, the SDK simply provides a single function
to retrieve the end-user-provided settings for the database connection, so that plugins can manage their
own database connections.

This approach does have downsides, which plugin authors should be cognizant of
when implementing databases into their plugins.

#### Retrieving the Database Configuration

The `modns_get_database()` function provides the database configuration as a pointer to the static `DatabaseInfo`
struct.

This struct is in reality a Rust enum with the following fields:

```Rust
enum DatabaseInfo {
    Sqlite: {
        file: ByteVector
    },
    Postgres: {
        host: ByteVector,
        port: u16,
        username: ByteVector,
        password: ByteVector,
    }
}
```

This is automatically compiled to a C structure known as a "tagged union" which looks like the following:

```C
typedef struct DatabaseInfo {
  DatabaseInfo_Tag tag;
  union {
    SQLite_Body sq_lite;
    Postgres_Body postgres;
  };
} DatabaseInfo;

typedef enum DatabaseInfo_Tag {
  SQLite,
  Postgres,
} DatabaseInfo_Tag;

typedef struct SQLite_Body {
  struct ByteVector file;
} SQLite_Body;

typedef struct Postgres_Body {
  struct ByteVector host;
  uint16_t port;
  struct ByteVector username;
  struct ByteVector password;
} Postgres_Body;
```

Thus, a function to initialize a database connection might look like:

```C
struct NativeDatabaseConnection init_db() {
    struct DatabaseInfo dbinfo = modns_get_database();

    if (dbinfo.tag == SQLite) {
        return init_native_sqlite_conn(dbinfo.sq_lite.file);
    } else {
        return init_native_postgres_conn(
            dbinfo.postgres.host,
            dbinfo.postgres.port,
            dbinfo.postgres.username,
            dbinfo.postgres.password
        )
    }
}
```

#### Best Practices for Using the Database

The main downside of this approach to database support is that no safeguards are provided to prevent
plugins from touching each other's data. Because of this, plugin authors should be extra careful to
avoid database practices which might conflict with other plugins.

The primary way to do this is to make sure that all of your data is stored in a namespace unique to
your plugin. In SQLite, prefix any tables created by your plugin with an identifier unique to your
plugin, such as `basecache_dnscache`. In Postgres, create a database named for your plugin.

### Storing Files on the filesystem

If your plugin needs more felxible storage than can be provided by the built-in database system, you
can store files on the server's filesystem. Similarly to databases, this is implemented by simply
providing you with the path to a directory in the server's `data-dir`, in which you are free to do as
you please.

#### Retrieving the Plugin Data Directory

To retrieve the name of your plugin's directory, call the `modns_plugin_data_dir` function, which returns
a `ByteVector`.

Notice that the server does not guarantee that the directory exists on the system. Your plugin should
create this directory itself (likely in the `impl_plugin_setup()` function, discussed
[below](#initializing-plugin-state)).

For example:

```C
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/stat.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include "modns-sdk.h"

// Get the plugin directory
struct ByteVector plugin_dir_bv = modns_plugin_data_dir();

// Convert the ByteVec to a C string
char *plugin_dir = malloc(256);
modns_strdup_from_bytevec(&plugin_dir_bv, plugin_dir);
modns_free_bytevec(plugin_dir_bv);

// Ensure the plugin directory is created
struct stat st = {0};
if (stat(plugin_dir, &st) == -1) {
    mkdir(plugin_dir, 0700);
}

```

### Non-Persistent Shared State

Your plugin will likely need some in-memory state that does not persist between restarts. This may
be a database connection, a bound socket, or an in-memory cache.

All interface functions include a `void * plugin_state` argument. This argument is for the plugin to
store any managed state between calls.

The server is unaware of the contents of the `plugin_state` pointer, meaning its memory
should be managed by the plugin (i.e., it is safe to `malloc` and `free` data stored in
this pointer, or to allow it to be managed by Go garbage collection).

#### Initializing Plugin State

Additionally, plugins can export the following functions to
initialize their state:

```C
void * impl_plugin_setup();
impl_plugin_teardown(void *);
```

These functions are called when the plugin is enabled and disabled, respectively.
The return value of the `setup` function is passed as `plugin_state` to all further
calls to the plugin, and should be freed by the `teardown` function.

#### Notes About Concurrency

The MoDNS server uses an asynchronous, multi-threaded architecture. This means that
your plugin may be called multiple times at once, on different threads. Care should
be taken to ensure that any mutable state is properly guarded against concurrent
writes, such as with mutex locks or atomic operations.

Generally, a function signature where `plugin_state` is `const` is an indication that
the function may be called concurrently. This is the case for all module implementation
functions. Some API control functions, discussed [below](#plugin-configuration-options-not-yet-implemented),
are run with a global write lock, meaning it is safe to mutate state in these functions.

### 

## Plugin Configuration Options (Not Yet Implemented)

NOTE: This feature is not yet implemented and details are subject to change

Plugins can provide configuration options to the user which are accessible through the web
interface or CLI. These can be either key-value pairs or commands, made available through
the API.

### Key-Value Configuration
 
To provide key-value settings, your plugin should export the following C functions:

```C

// Set the value of a key-value parameter
uint8_t impl_plugin_kv_set(const struct ByteVector *key,
                           const struct ByteVector *value,
                           struct ByteVector *resp,
                           void *plugin_state);

// Get the value of a key-value parameter
uint8_t impl_plugin_kv_get(const struct ByteVector *key,
                           struct ByteVector *resp,
                           const void *plugin_state);

```

Implementing these functions exposes the following API endpoints:

```
POST /api/plugins/<your-plugin-uuid>/config?<key>=<value>
GET /api/plugins/<your-plugin-uuid>/config?<key>[&<key>...]
```

#### Set Function

The `kv_set` function is called whenever the above `POST` request is made. `key` and `value`
are provided as `ByteVector`s, and a mutable `ByteVector` is provided to encode a response.

The return code of each function is used to determine the return code of the API
call. Available response codes are:

| rc | API response |
| -- | ------------- |
| 0 | `200 OK` |
| 1 | `201 Created` |
| 2 | `400 Bad Request` |
| 3 | `401 Unauthorized` |
| 4 | `403 Forbidden` |
| 5 | `404 Not Found` |

Any other return code becomes `500 Internal Server Error`.

#### Get Function

The `kv_get` function is called whenever a `GET` request is recieved for one or more options.
`key` is provided as a `ByteVector`, and a mutable `ByteVector` is provided to encode a response.

On success, this function should return 0 and encode the value in `*resp`.

On success, the API returns a JSON object where each key maps to the response provided in `*resp`.
When multiple values are requested in a single API call, a single function call is made for each
requested key.

In the event of an error, the API will immediately return the appropriate return code and an error
message encoded in `*resp`. Any values retrieved earlier in the API call are discarded. Error return
codes and their associated API response codes are:

| rc | API response |
| -- | ------------- |
| 1 | `400 Bad Request` |
| 2 | `401 Unauthorized` |
| 3 | `403 Forbidden` |
| 4 | `404 Not Found` |

Any other return code becomes `500 Internal Server Error`.

### Plugin Commands

Sometimes, a user will need to interact with your plugin without needing to set some key-value pair.
For these cases, plugins can implement commands. A command is simply a string that is provided to
your plugin to do with as it pleases.

To expose commands as part of your plugin's interface, expose the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_plugin_command(const struct ByteVector *command,
                            struct ByteVector *resp,
                            void *plugin_state);
```

The API response code is determined by the return value of this function. Return codes and their
associated API response codes are:

| rc | API response |
| -- | ------------- |
| 0 | `200 OK` |
| 1 | `201 Created` |
| 2 | `400 Bad Request` |
| 3 | `401 Unauthorized` |
| 4 | `403 Forbidden` |
| 5 | `404 Not Found` |

Any other return code becomes `500 Internal Server Error`.

In all cases, the contents of `*resp` are used as the body of the response.

## Providing a Web Interface

MoDNS hosts a webpage for ease of maneagement.

### Dashboard Components

Plugins can provide widgets for the web dashboard which display stats provided by the plugin.

#### Implementing a Backend

Data is pulled from your plugin by polling the API endpoint `/api/plugins/<uuid>/stats/<key>`. To implement
a backend for this endpoint, expose the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_statistics(const struct ByteVector *key,
                        struct ByteVector *resp,
                        const void *plugin_state);
```

This function should write a JSON response into `*resp` and return to indicate the appropriate response code.
Function return codes and their associated API response codes are:

| rc | API response |
| -- | ------------- |
| 0 | `200 OK` |
| 1 | `404 Not Found` |

Any other return code becomes `500 Internal Server Error`.

##### Formatting API Responses

The format of the JSON response depends on the particular style of widget consuming the data. Sample responses
for each style are provided below.

###### Line Chart
```json
{
  "x_axis_label": "Transportation",
  "y_axis_label": "Count",
  "data": [
    {
      "id": "japan",
      "data": [
        {
          "x": "plane",
          "y": 94
        },
        {
          "x": "helicopter",
          "y": 171
        },
      ]
    },
    {
      "id": "france",
      "data": [
        {
          "x": "plane",
          "y": 177
        },
        {
          "x": "helicopter",
          "y": 204
        },
      ]
    },
    {
      "id": "us",
      "data": [
        {
          "x": "plane",
          "y": 254
        },
        {
          "x": "helicopter",
          "y": 264
        },
      ]
    },
  ]
}
```
###### Bar Chart
```json
{
  "index_by": "country",
  "x_axis_label": "Country",
  "y_axis_label": "Food",
  "data": [
    {
      "country": "AD",
      "hot dog": 137,
      "burger": 96,
      "kebab": 72,
      "donut": 140,
    },
    {
      "country": "AE",
      "hot dog": 55,
      "burger": 28,
      "kebab": 58,
      "donut": 29,
    },
  ]
}
```

###### Pie Chart
```json
{
  "data": [
    {
      "id": "elixir",
      "label": "elixir",
      "value": 218,
    },
    {
      "id": "javascript",
      "label": "javascript",
      "value": 533,
    },
    {
      "id": "rust",
      "label": "rust",
      "value": 579,
    },
    {
      "id": "php",
      "label": "php",
      "value": 120,
    },
  ]
}
```

###### Stat Box
```json
{
  "label": "Queries Blocked",
  "progress": 20,                     // optional if you want to display percentage
  "statistic": 123099,
  "differenceFromLast": -150          // optional if want to display difference from last check
}
```

##### Status Box
```json
{
  "status_label": "Running",    // label 
  "status_good": true,          // will show a check mark on true and an exclamation mark on false
}
```

###### Table
Note: one field needs to be labeled as `id`, (the label will show has the `headerName`) or else the chart will make one for you and display it as a number.

```json
{
  "headers": [
    {
      "field": "id",
      "headerName": "Name",
      "width": 300,
    },
    {
      "field": "email",
      "headerName": "Email",
      "width": 400,
    },
    {
      "field": "age",
      "headerName": "Age",
      "type": "number",
      "width": 100,
    },
  ],
  "data": [
    {
      "id": "Jon Snow",
      "email": "jonsnow@gmail.com",
      "age": 35,
    },
    {
      "id": "Cersei Lannister",
      "email": "cerseilannister@gmail.com",
      "age": 42,
    },
    {
      "id": "Jaime Lannister",
      "email": "jaimelannister@gmail.com",
      "age": 45,
    },
  ]
}
```

#### Adding A Widget on the Frontend

##### Adding

First, check the Server Settings and decide if you want a local or global dashboard.
- A local dashboard will show a different dashboard for every device the administrator logs into.
- A global dashboard will show the same dashboard accross all devices.

On the Dashboard Page, use the `Edit` Button to add components and/or edit existing components.

It will ask for:
- The type of component
- The uuid of the plugin providing the data
- The keyy to use when requesting the data
- The height as a number and the width as a percentage

Be sure to click save.

##### Editing

Editing Features will come in the future


##### Deleting

Deleting is possible in the Edit Mode

Plugins can provide widgets for the web dashboard which display stats provided by the plugin.

#### Implementing a Widget on the Frontend

TODO: Frontend

#### Implementing a Backend

Data is pulled from your plugin by polling the API endpoint `/api/plugins/<uuid>/stats/<key>`. To implement
a backend for this endpoint, expose the following C function:

```C
uint8_t impl_statistics(const struct ByteVector *key,
                        struct ByteVector *resp,
                        const void *plugin_state);
```

This function should write a JSON response into `*resp` and return to indicate the appropriate response code.
Function return codes and their associated API response codes are:

| rc | API response |
| -- | ------------- |
| 0 | `200 OK` |
| 1 | `404 Not Found` |

Any other return code becomes `500 Internal Server Error`.

##### Formatting API Responses

TODO: Frontend

### Settings Page

To create a settings page for your plugin, you can simply use the Plugin Settings Page creation tool located under the `Tools` tab on the webserver.

You can add elements and link them to your plugin's configuration settings or send your plugin commands.

Note: You do not need to add an enabled settings, the server will provide this one for you.

Alternatively, you can use this JSON structure to write it manually. 
Keep in mind the page will display your settings in the order you list them.
There are two elements per row (unless one element is wide or  placeholder is used).

```json
[
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Title
  {
    "type": "title",                          // Specifies the type of element. All elements detailed below.
    "display_text": "<title>",                // text to display as the title
    "wide": true                              // LEAVE AS TRUE FOR TITLE ONLY
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Displays some text
  {
    "type": "text",                           // Type of element
    "display_text": "<label>",                // Text to display as text
    "wide": false                             // True or False
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Executes a specified Command on click
  {
    "type": "button",                         // Type of element
    "command": "<command>",                   // Command to send to the plugin
    "display_text": "<label>",                // Text to display as label
    "wide": false                             // True or False
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Checkbox List, sent as Key, Value pair to your plugin
  {
    "type": "checkbox",                       // Type of element
    "key_name": "<unique key>",               // Key name in your plugin. Upon change, sends the key, value pair to your plugin
    "display_text": "<label>",                // Text to display as label
    "list": [                                 // List of checkbox items
      "<item 1>",
      "<item 2>",
      "<...>",
      "<item n>",
    ],
    "wide": true                              // True or False
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Text input, sent as Key, Value pair to your plugin
  {
    "type": "input",                          // Type of item
    "key_name": "input_key",                  // Key name in your plugin. Upon change, sends the key, value pair to your plugin
    "display_text": "Input label",            // Text to display as label
    "wide": false                             // True or False
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// Switch
  {
    "type": "switch",                         // Type of item
    "key_name": "<unique key>",               // Key name in your plugin. Upon change, sends the key, value pair to your plugin
    "display_text": "<label>",                // Text to display as label
    "wide": false                             // True or False
  },
  ////////////////////////////////////////////// If previos element on row is not wide, this will move the next element to the next row if it is not wide.
  {
    "type": "placeholder",                    // Empty item
    "wide": false                             // LEAVE AS FALSE FOR PLACEHOLDDER ONLY
  }
]
```

Place the downloaded or created file named `custom_settings.json` in your plugin directory.

This exposes the `/api/plugins/<your-plugin-uuid>/settingspage` API endpoint.

### Providing a Logo

If you would like to provide a logo to your plugin to be included on pages related to your plugin,
include a `favicon.*` file in the plugin's directory.

Supported formats are `png`, `ico`, and `webp`.


This exposes the `/api/plugins/<your-plugin-uuid>/favicon` API endpoint.

## Compiling Plugins

As mentioned above, plugins must be compiled into a shared object file named `plugin_<arch>.so`.

`arch` refers to the architecture the plugin is compiled for. Accepted values are `x86_64`, `aarch64`, and `arm`

A simple example of compiling a C plugin would look like this:

```bash
gcc -shared -fPIC -I${MODNS_SDK_DIR} -u_init_modns_sdk -L${MODNS_SDK_DIR} -lmodns_sdk my-plugin.c -o plugin_x86_64.so
```

To compile a Go program:

```bash
export CGO_CFLAGS=-I${MODNS_SDK_DIR}
export CGO_LDFLAGS=-u_init_modns_sdk -L${MODNS_SDK_DIR} -lmodns_sdk

go build -buildmode c-shared -o plugin_x86_64.so my-plugin-module/my-plugin
```

The following flags are required:

| Flag | Description |
| ---- | ----------- |
| `-shared` | Produce a shared object that can be dynamically loaded at program runtime |
| `-fPIC` | Produce [P]osition [I]ndependent [C]ode which can be referenced regardless of memory location |
| `-I${MODNS_SDK_DIR}` | Add `$MODNS_SDK_DIR` to the C header search path, so that `#include "modns-sdk.h"` in the C source code finds the proper header file |
| `-u_init_modns_sdk` | Always export the `_init_modns_sdk` function, even though it isn't in any header files. This function is used internally by the MoDNS server when your plugin is loaded. |
| `-L${MODNS_SDK_DIR}` | Add `$MODNS_SDK_DIR` to the linker search path, so that the linker is able to find the SDK library |
| `-lmodns_sdk` | Link against the `libmodns-sdk.a` file found in `$MODNS_SDK_DIR` |

## Packaging Plugins

Now that we have all of our plugin's artifacts, we need to package
them into a form that can be installed and loaded into a running
MoDNS server.

### Plugin Manifest

The first thing we need to do is provide the last few pieces of
metadata for our plugin. Namely, this is the plugin's __friendly
name__ and __description__. These two pieces of metadata are used
by the frontend to provide a user-friendly interface for our plugin.

These extra metadata are provided in the `manifest.yaml` file. A
basic `manifest.yaml` file might look like this:

```yaml

friendly_name: Simple Logger

description: |
    This is a simple logger plugin. It logs all requests and
    their responses.

    This plugin is an example.

```

Note the `|` character at the beginning of the `description` field that
allows for the description to be multiple lines.

### Directory Structure

TODO: Add information for frontend files

On the MoDNS server, plugins are placed in a directory inside the server's
plugin path. When loading plugins, the server searches that directory for
subdirectories containing the required files (`plugin_<arch>.so` and `manifest.yaml`).

To support multiple architectures, include a `plugin_<arch>.so` file for each supported
architecture.

For example, on a MoDNS server which has `/opt/modns/plugins` on it's plugin
path, that directory will look something like:

```
/opt/modns/plugins
├── plugin-1
│   ├── plugin_x86_64.so
│   └── manifest.yaml
└── plugin-2
    ├── plugin_x86_64.so
    ├── favicon.ico
    └── manifest.yaml
```

When packaging our plugins, we compress them into `zip` or `tar.gz` archives
which mimic this structure. This has the added benefit of allowing us to
place multiple plugins in one package. For example, this might look like:

```
my-plugin-package.tar.gz
├── my-plugin-1
│   ├── plugin_x86_64.so
│   └── manifest.yaml
└── my-plugin-2
    ├── plugin_x86_64.so
    └── manifest.yaml
```

Please note that the server does use the directory names of each plugin
to provide cli-friendly names and to determine which plugins have already
been loaded. For this reason a few restrictions are imposed on plugin
directory names:

- The directory name must not contain spaces or other non-alphanumeric
characters. Dashes (`-`) can be substituted for spaces.
- The directory name must be unique. Use common sense to provide a name
for the plugin that won't interfere with other plugins. Note that
default plugins included with MoDNS begin with the `base-` prefix and
are typically stored separately from user-installed plugins

The server will refuse to load plugins which do not meet these requirements.

## Full example: A simple logger written in Go

TODO

